# CAPSTONE-PROJECT-1
Here, I documented my first Project work from Ladies-in-Tech-Africa, courtesy of Incubator hub.

Abstract
This project aims at getting insights from the sales performance of a retail store and inducing step to take for the betterment of the company. The analysis covers the sales overview for both 2023 and 2024, regional breakdown, product performance based on the quantity sold, and revenue generated and sales gotten over time (monthly and quarterly). The results reveal the top selling products, the regions which certain products sell better and the revenue generated by each product.

INTRODUCTION
In today's competitive market, businesses are constantly looking for ways to optimize and improve their performance and understand customer behaviors and purchases to gain a strategic edge. this project was initiated to address the need for a comprehensive analysis of sales data, enabling the identification of trends and opportunities within various regions. By diving deep into this sales data, this analysis will uncover patterns that inform effective decision-making for pricing, product promotion and resource allocation.

Objectives
TO support the company in making data-driven decisions that will enhance profitability and customer satisfaction
The insights derived will ultimately guide to strategies to improve market positioning
To identify high potential product
To predict and anticipate shifts in customer demand
DATA INFORMATION
Data sources
The data used in this project was obtained from the Incubator Hub. It includes detailed records of transactions, customer demographics, product information and regional sales distribution.

Data Collection
The data used was collected and complied through transaction logging. This ensures that the dataset represents an accurate record of customer interactions and purchasing patterns over a year and eight months.

Data Characteristics
The dataset includes the following variables:

OrderID : Unique identification of each order purchased by the customers
CustomerID : Unique identification for each customer
Product : Items purchased by the customers
Region :
Order Date : Date when the items(products) were purchased
Quantity : The amount of items purchased in each transaction
Unit Price : The cost price of each item purchased
Revenue : The revenue generated when the items were sold
Sales : the money gotten when the item were sold
Average : The average of sale
BASIC STATISTICS IN THE DATASET
Total Sales: 2.1 Million
Average Sales: 211.8
Total Customer: 9921
Marginal Profit: 1.8 Million
Total Quantity: 68.5K
METHODOLOGY
Data Preparation
Removing duplicates Eliminated duplicated records to ensure Data Quality

Adding New Columns Added new columns sales and revenue by multipling the quantity of the product purchased by the respective unit price, added an average column for the sales/revenue of products purchased and also added a calculated column for the Marginal profit made in the company over the space of a year and eight months.

EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS (EDA)
After cleaning the data in excel and making pivot tables for analysis, it was exported to SQL for further analysis and finally to power BI for creation of dashboard. The following were carried out:

Descriptive statistics: Excel was used to calculate average sales, total sales and revenue by region and product, providing a summary of sales volume and revenue distribution. SQL queries calculated total sales and revenue for product, total revenue and sales per region, monthly sales and the most purchased products, establishing overview of the dataset. Summary cards in Power BI displayed key metrics such as total revenue, average sales, marginal profit etc, in a visually concise format.
Data filtering and segmentation: Excel's filtering and pivot tables allowed segmentation by region, product and year, revealing targeted insights. SQL's WHERE and GROUP BY clauses filtered and grouped by region and product, to isolate specific insights. slicers and filters in Power BI allowed segmentations of region, product and year, enabling dynamic drill-down analysis of specific data groups.
Dashboard creation: Excel's Pivot table enabled structured summaries, allowing for dynamic updates to analyze various sales dimensions. Aggregated data in SQL formed the foundation for dashboards, supporting seamless integration with other tools for detailed analysis. Power BI's interactive dashboards provided a real-time view with slicers for in-depth analysis across customer and product dimensions.
TOOLS USED
Microsoft Excel: Used for data cleaning, analysis and creating pivot visualization DOWNLOAD HERE
MIcrosoft SQL server (SMSS): Used for pre-processing DOWNLOAD HERE
Microsoft Power BI desktop: Used for creating dashboards and visualization DOWNLOAD HERE
ANALYSIS
Dashboard Overview
sales 1 sales 2

Data Analysis and Insight Generation
This visualization tells us what the customers patronize the most and how they shop. this reveals to us what they purchase the most and the least and at what time and period they shop most and also the regions with the highest revenue generated.

REGIONAL BREAKDOWN : The pie cahrt and bar chart visualization on region revealed the rate and revenue generated by each region. The region with the highest rate and revenue is South with a rate of 44.16% with 928K generated, then the East had 23.13% with 486K generated, the North had 18.42% and 387K generated, and lastly the West had 14.29% and 300K generated. The difference between the South and Other regions is a very huge which means that the other regions are underperforming when it comes to certain products, perhaps due to the stores in those regions not having what the customers are more in-need of in relations to their environment. RECOMMENDATION : conduct a targeted marheting campaign focusing more on the most popular products for each region and giving didcounts and promotion to the products that are not-so popular to encourage customers to purchase them. it is also recommended to move the most demanded products of a region to that region to control loss of profit in a region, for example shoes are purchased better in the south bringing more than 500K but in the west, it brings just 30K so brings the more shoes to the south where they are more in demand is good for company profit and customer satisfaction.
PRODUCT PERFORMANCE : The bar and column charts visualization on sales reveal the revenue generated by each product and that certain products perform better. the product with the highest revenue is Shoe which generated 613K, followed by Shirt with 486K, Hat with 316K, Gloves with 297K, Jacket with 208K and finally Socks with 181K with the lowest revenue. this might also be as a result of customer want in relations to environment. RECOMMENDATION : Allocate more marketing resources to the high and better-performing products being shoes and shirts and hats and promote them on digital and social channels. the other can be introduced as complementary products to encourage upselling and analyze trend-basd demand spikes to adjust stock levels in advance to prevent profit loss.
SALES TREND OVER TIME : The column and line charts Visualization represent the monthly and quarterly sales repectively. The monthly reveals that febuary has the highest revenue turnover and that september has the lowest revenue turnover. the charts also reveals seasonal spikes during seasons such as Winter and Summer and drop-down during spring and autumn, the charts shows a rise during the Winter months(December, january, February) and a fall during the Spring months(March, April, May), then another rise in the Summer months(June, July, August) and finally a fall in the Autumn months(September, October, November), in a way the monthly trend moved like a wave. The quarterly line graph shows that the highest quarter is the first quarter and the lowest is the last quarter and it also moves like a wave. RECOMMENDATION : Plan targeted marketing campaigns around peak sales periods to maximize engagement and offer special discounts or promotions during off-peak periods to drive sales and smooth out fluctuations. prepare contingency plans for significant trend fluctuations, and also track trending products to understand customer preferences and develop new and improved versions.
CONCLUSION
The analysis of sales data provided valuable insights into trends, product performance and regional breakdown. key findings highlights the importance of understanding sales dynamics over time, optimizing inventory and leveraging targeted marketing strategies. By recognizing seasonal trends and identifing high-performing products and customer segment, the company can make data-driven decisions to enhance sales performance. in conclusion, this project underscores the potential for growth through infermed decision-making. By strategically responding to identified trends and patterns, the company is well-positioned to boost sales, increase profitability, and achieve sustainable growth in the coming years.
